Machine-learning models are increasingly used for tropical-cyclone
Generic SHAP applied to high-dimensional geophysical data can fragment
GeoShapley preserves a geographic player but high-resolution spatial
Six fitted ensemble regression models for 24-hour tropical-cyclone
One geographically coherent GEO player
Batches of standardized random directions for NES finite differences
Background gradient matrix Gbg with B rows and Nfeatures columns
Global importance covariance matrix C
Local gradient matrix Ggeo with S rows and Nfeatures columns
Monte Carlo averaged gradient estimates with iteration-to-iteration
One global DerSHAP attribution value phi i for each feature
Location main-effect magnitude
Location-feature interaction-strength proxy
Optimized nugget sill and effective range for Copula interpolation
Regular-grid spatial attribution map
One held-out mean absolute error for each of the six models
XGB reference model for detailed attribution
PCC evidence that similarly accurate ensembles encode divergent
Aggregated XGB attribution records prepared for physical
Genesis mature and decay attribution groups along the storm track
JTWC intensity-category attribution groups for the dominant predictors
Geo-dSHAP identifies where and when ensemble forecasts express